---
title: "[]{#_oh7thv8pn6m3 .anchor}Concept Document Template Guide"
---

Read this document before you start working on the [[Concept
Template]{.underline}](#concept-template).

## Background

## What is a concept doc?

Concept documents play their role in providing readers with the
necessary background information to understand a product, process, task,
or any other conceptual or descriptive information. For instance,
imagine a concept document called \"Introduction to Artificial
Intelligence.\" This document would provide a clear and concise
explanation of the fundamental principles, terminology, and key concepts
related to AI. A concept document called \"Object-Oriented Programming\"
would offer a structured explanation of the core principles of OOP,
helping team members gain a deeper understanding of this programming
paradigm and serving as a bridge towards implementing OOP effectively in
software development projects and facilitating the application of these
principles in practice.

A concept document aims to provide clear, concise, and consistent
information about a particular concept or process. It serves as a
roadmap that organizes the information in a logical sequence to
facilitate better understanding and readability. It enables readers to
map their existing knowledge and understanding to the tasks they need to
perform and to gain other essential insights about a product, process,
or system.

Concept documents can be thought of as extended definitions of major
abstractions, such as a mechanism or function. They help explain the
context and components of a product or service and how these elements
fit into a broader framework.

## Why do I need a concept doc?

A concept document is important for conveying foundational ideas or
processes. The key reasons why a concept document is integral include
the following:

-   Alignment and Collaboration: A concept document serves as a shared
    point of reference for businesses and teams, holding high-level
    ideas. By having a shared document that holds the ideas, it is much
    easier to communicate ideas and track progress. Having a central
    description of core concepts reduces repeated explanations through a
    document; it is much easier to have a concept document that can then
    be referenced when needed.

-   Reader Comprehension: Concept documents are important because they
    provide foundational knowledge and background that gives readers
    context that will help in understanding more specific content.
    Readers can see the connections and relationships between different
    elements, helping them make informed decisions about your product.
    Decision-making is much easier to do if the reader understands the
    broader context.

A concept doc presents detailed information in a comprehensive way, so
that:

-   Your reader will be able to proceed to other types of content, such
    as how-tos and reference, with all the foundational knowledge,
    background and context necessary.

-   Your reader will make an informed decision about using certain
    features of your solution and prioritize efforts throughout the
    development process.

-   Your reader will know how certain concepts relate to the broader
    context. They can see the connections and relationships between
    different elements and how they fit into a bigger picture.

There is an additional benefit that concept doc may bring to the teams
and businesses internally --- they serve as a common reference point,
enabling all stakeholders to align their understanding and expectations,
facilitate collaboration and knowledge sharing among team members,
making it easier to communicate ideas, track progress, and maintain
consistency across different teams and departments.

## Where is its place in the whole documentation?

A concept document provides the necessary context and foundational
understanding for new ideas, processes or features that are introduced.
It is not always necessary within technical documentation, but is often
useful.

They act as bridges between overarching ideas and more detailed
instructions, allowing readers to establish a solid understanding of the
core concepts before delving into intricate operations. Additionally,
they serve as primers for users who are not yet ready to dive into
step-by-step guides. By presenting the core concepts and principles in a
clear and structured manner, the concept doc gradually develops the
reader\'s understanding.

They act as a bridge between the overall ideas and the more detailed
instructions or guides, allowing readers to understand the core of what
is going on before they move on to more complex operations. It also acts
as a primer for users who are not yet ready to dive into concrete
operations or step-by-step guides.

In the reader\'s critical user journey through documentation, a concept
document is usually at the early sections. While concept documents are
commonly found at the beginning of documentation, they can also appear
throughout when introducing new concepts to provide the necessary
context.

## How does the reader get to this document?

There are two main options here:

1.  Users start their journey with this document or land here from the
    search results.

2.  Users get there in the middle of their journey because they stumbled
    upon an unknown concept and in this case the document serves as a
    middle layer (to make a decision about using this concept). Ryan
    Young in the talk calls this [[framework a layered
    cake]{.underline}](https://www.writethedocs.org/videos/portland/2023/is-it-layer-cake-thinking-in-content-levels-ryan-young/).
    They may come by clicking to a link in the how to prerequisites or A
    reader clicks on an \<link\>New concept\</link\> within another
    document, and comes to the Concept to learn more.

Understanding these pathways is essential for tailoring the content to
meet the varying needs of users who either start their exploration with
the concept or arrive here as part of an ongoing information quest. It
prompts authors to provide a concise but comprehensive overview at the
beginning of the document, ensuring clarity for both scenarios and
helping users seamlessly integrate the new concept into their existing
information architecture.

## How to write a Concept document

It\'s important to recognize that within the realm of Concept Documents,
there exists dozens of valid approaches and documentation techniques.
Each author, armed with their experience, must choose the right
technique tailored to the specific demands of the task at hand. Concept
Documents, in their essence, are more than a mere exposition of ideas;
they are a thoughtful curation, a delicate balance of clarity and
detail, making them a formidable undertaking where the mastery of both
the technical and the narrative converges. Selecting the right technique
becomes not just a choice but an artful navigation through the
intricacies of communication, ensuring that the document resonates with
its audience, serving as a beacon of understanding in the vast amount of
information.

Here are the key steps and considerations for crafting an effective
concept document:

### Scope

The scope of your concept document is a foundational element. It should
be dedicated to a single concept and strike a balance between
comprehensiveness and relevance. Here\'s how to define the scope:

-   Dedicate to a Single Concept: Ensure that your document focuses on
    just one concept to prevent confusion or information overload. If
    the explanation begins to explain another concept, it is advisable
    to start a different concept document and provide a link.

-   Avoid instructional and referential information: The concept
    document should also avoid instructional text and step-by-step
    guides which are different types of documentation.

-   Deep Understanding: Dive deep enough to provide a thorough
    understanding without overwhelming the reader.

-   Define Essential Information: Consider what would be valuable to
    someone who has never encountered the concept before. Use this
    perspective to define the scope.

### Structure 

A well-structured concept document is crucial for enabling readers to
incrementally build their understanding of the concept.

Consider the following practices:

-   Inverted Pyramid Technique: Consider using the inverted pyramid
    technique, where you start with a high-level overview and then
    gradually delve into the details. This approach helps readers
    quickly grasp the main idea and then explore further as needed.

-   Key Questions: Address the key questions of what, when, who, why,
    where, and how (5W and 1H), placing these explanations near the
    beginning of your document.

-   Headings and Subheadings: Organize your ideas using headings and
    subheadings to enhance readability and accessibility.

-   Chunking: Break down complex concepts into smaller parts, and use
    abstraction to focus on the most important information.

-   Real-World Examples: Include real-world examples and use cases to
    provide context and help readers understand how the concept is
    applied.

-   Answer the question "How can I use it" or "How it helps me" from the
    reader's perspective.

-   High-Level Summary: Start with a brief, high-level summary of the
    topic, then build upon that foundation to explain the concept in
    detail.

-   Definition: Provide a clear and concise definition of the concept.

### Language

The language used in your concept document should prioritize clarity and
simplicity, tailored to the audience\'s expertise level. To enhance
accessibility:

-   Minimize Jargon: Strive to minimize the use of domain-specific
    jargon and technical terms to make the document more accessible,
    especially for new users.

-   Conversational Tone: Maintain a conversational tone that fully
    engages the reader.

-   Avoid Implementation Details: Stay clear of delving into
    implementation-specific details, as your document should focus on
    the conceptual content.

### Metaphors and Analogies

Metaphors and analogies are effective tools for enhancing the
relatability and clarity of your concept document. When using them:

-   When to Use Metaphors and Analogies: Use them when they enhance
    understanding, align with your audience\'s background, and bring
    clarity and context.

-   When to Be Cautious: Exercise caution when there\'s a potential lack
    of understanding due to cultural, age, or background differences or
    when they might complicate the concept.

A List Apart style guide advises avoiding extended metaphors if
possible, so think case by case whether your audience will understand
them and if it adds anything to their understanding.

Best Practices for Metaphors and Analogies:

-   Opt for Universal Metaphors: Choose universal metaphors that are
    culture, age, and background-independent.

-   Ensure Alignment: Ensure that the metaphor or analogy seamlessly
    aligns with the concept and enhances clarity.

-   Understand Your Audience: Consider your audience\'s familiarity with
    the chosen metaphor before incorporating it into your document.

While universal metaphors are generally safe and reliable, they may not
always be as engaging or memorable as more specific or popular culture
references. The decision to use universal metaphors or pop-culture
references should be guided by your understanding of your target
audience, concept complexity, and the specific goals of your concept
document.

Analogies act as memory aids, turning abstract ideas into tangible
mental images. These mental images can serve as reference points when
your audience needs to recall the concept or explain it to others.

### Use Known Concepts and Examples 

Connect complex ideas with familiar concepts or examples to enhance
understanding:

-   Pick Familiar Comparisons: Choose comparisons and examples that are
    easy to understand, considering your audience\'s background.

-   Enhance Understanding: Linking new information to known concepts
    helps readers grasp the new information more effectively.

## Sections in a Concept Document

Sections which should exist in a concept template include:

### **(Optional) About the "Introduction" section**

Briefly introduce a concept, explain its importance or relevance, and
provide an overview of the content that will be covered in the document.

Optionally, you may begin the document with an introductory paragraph
before diving into the definition. This introductory paragraph can set
the stage, explaining the concept\'s relevance and importance. It
provides readers with a context for what they\'re about to learn and
what they can expect in the document. You may skip it and jump right
into the definition section.

Typical wordings to use are:

-   In this article, we\'ll discuss the basics of X and how it works in
    Y.

### **About the "Definition" section**

Define the concept so that you and your reader will have a shared
understanding of the language used throughout the document.Think of it
as a glossary definition.

This is a good moment to define the scope of the concept --- define its
boundaries, what you'll cover in a document and how deep into details
you will dive and the extent of the details you will provide.

It may be useful to define what is out of scope --- what you don\'t mean
by that concept and what won't be covered. If the concept has synonyms
in other spheres or products, it may be useful to explicitly
disassociate from them in this section of the document to ensure a
uniform understanding of the concept.

Provide an overview of how the concept fits into a bigger picture. This
involves explaining how the concept interacts with other concepts
[[already known by your
audience]{.underline}](#use-known-concepts-and-examples), provided you
have knowledge of their level of understanding. Additionally, you can
break down the concept into smaller, more digestible pieces. By doing
so, you help your readers make connections, recognize patterns, and gain
a deeper understanding of the subject matter.

Sometimes, concepts are explained by using
[[analogies]{.underline}](#metaphors-and-analogies) that the user should
be familiar with. For example, while explaining the complex topic of how
electricity goes through wires, you could relate it to a more familiar
topic, such as how water goes through pipes. It helps to bridge
knowledge gaps.

Also, when you give a definition, it may be useful to stick to
problem-solution or benefit-focused language.

Typical wordings to use are:

-   {X} is;

-   {Y} represents

-   {X} is connected to

-   {X} are organized {describe the way how}

-   {Y} is similar to

-   {X addresses the common pain points of ...

-   {Y} solves the challenge of ...

-   By implementing {X}, users can ...

-   By using {Y}, {specify users/target audience} gain ...

-   To use {X}, you create {Y}

### **(Optional) A visual aid or a diagram**

Use a diagram to illustrate how the concept is organized or how it fits
into a broader system; a decision tree, a flow chart, or a system
overview diagram is best suited for these tasks.

Usually a concept is best explained with one diagram. This primary
diagram should be placed close to the top, typically under the
description. Presenting the diagram early helps draw the reader in, and
helps them orient themselves visually.

Sometimes multiple diagrams should be used to explain different aspects
of the concept, and these should be placed next to relevant annotations
about it.

Diagrams are most valuable when they simplify complex relationships,
depict processes, or illustrate hierarchies. They may not be necessary
for straightforward concepts or those that are easily explained through
text alone. The key is to strike a balance, ensuring that diagrams
contribute meaningfully to the document\'s overall coherence without
overwhelming or distracting the reader.

### **About the "Use cases" section**

The use cases section is a good place to apply the StoryBrand framework
to engage readers and add more storytelling elements. Storytelling helps
engage users and memorize concepts by association with the story.
Research in neuroscience has revealed that narratives, such as those
applied in the StoryBrand framework, engage multiple areas of the brain.
The brain\'s response to words associated with smells, textures,
metaphors, and motion blurs the distinction between reading and
real-life experiences. Renowned neuroscientist Keith Oatley suggests
that reading fiction offers a vivid simulation of reality, engaging the
mind similarly to computer simulations.

The Storybrand technique is a specific approach to storytelling that
involves framing the story in terms of a protagonist who has a problem
and needs a guide to help them solve it. The concept or solution being
presented is positioned as the guide that can help the protagonist
overcome their challenges and achieve their goals. By framing the
concept in this way, the reader is more likely to engage with the story
and see the product as a valuable solution to their problems.

1.  Make your user a protagonist of the story.

2.  Define what challenges they're facing, so you can craft a story that
    resonates with them.

3.  Set a stage for the story --- highlight the specific problem or
    obstacle that your target audience is encountering. Make it
    relatable and evoke empathy.

4.  Position your concept or feature as the guide that can help the
    protagonist overcome their challenges and achieve their goals.
    Outline the steps or key concepts that the user needs to understand
    to effectively use the product or feature.

5.  Illustrate how the user\'s life or business can be transformed by
    using a concept.

For example, you're talking about the containerisation concept and your
"protagonist" is a system administrator in a large company and they are
experiencing numerous typical problems, such as slow deployments,
difficulty scaling up service, or frequent power outages. So you act as
a guide and introduce the "protagonist" to containerised applications,
their infrastructure and how various aspects of these solve the
protagonist's problems.

By following this framework, you can create a concept document that
captures attention, communicates the value of your product or feature,
and motivates readers to take action.

When using storytelling as a technique in a concept document, it\'s
essential to strike a delicate balance between engaging the reader and
ensuring that the concept remains relevant and comprehensible. A common
pitfall for writers is becoming overly enthusiastic about their story,
which can lead to an overload of information that might distract from
the core concept. Thus, as you weave a story into your concept, always
consider how it enhances understanding rather than overwhelming your
audience with unnecessary details.

Another option is to follow the traditional user story format. A typical
use case usually follows the format: \"As a {persona}, I want to {do
something} so that I can {achieve some goal}.\"

Begin with a clear identification of the persona involved, the action
they want to perform, and the goal they want to achieve. This format is
concise and easy to understand, providing a structured framework for
demonstrating how your product or feature serves the user\'s needs.

### **(Optional) About the "Background" section**

The background section may describe the prehistory of the concept if it
is important for better understanding. You can provide relevant
information and context that helps readers understand the following
contexts:

-   Historical background (where the idea originated from, is there any
    legacy that made it work like that).

-   Industry context (any significant changes in the sector you're
    working in that influenced the concept).

-   Market and technology trends (any new disruptive technologies that
    appear (AI), business trends (recession, remote work), or industry
    regulations.

It can describe how or why something was designed or developed, what
decisions were made in the past and why. In addition, you can describe
the alternatives.

Typical wordings to use are:

-   The reason {X} is designed that way is because historically, ...

-   The idea of {Y} originated from the growing demand for ...

-   Recent advancements in {X} and {Y} have opened up new possibilities
    for ...

-   With the rise of {X}, the need for things such as {Y} has become
    paramount.

-   Over the past decade, {advancements in technology} have transformed
    the way ...

### **(Optional) About the "Comparison" section**

If the concept has few implementations, versions, or types, or it has a
direct preeceder, you may put a comparison table that answers the
question --- what is the difference and why do I need to choose a
certain option?

[\| What \| Why needed \|]{.mark}

[\|\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--\|\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--\|]{.mark}

[\| {concept} type 1 \| A reason to use it \|]{.mark}

[\| {concept} type 2 \| A reason to use it \|]{.mark}

### **(Optional) About the "What's next" section**

Provide links or references to additional resources that can help
readers explore the topic further or dive deeper into specific aspects
of the concept.

It is better to split them into a few groups (for example, How-to's,
Linked concepts, External materials, etc.), not more than 3-5 links
each, to avoid providing a reader with a wall of links so that they will
be overwhelmed.

